Overview

Heart disease describes a range of conditions that affect the heart. Heart disease includes:

Blood vessel disease, such as coronary artery disease.

Irregular heartbeats, called arrhythmias.

Heart conditions that you're born with, called congenital heart defects.

Disease of the heart muscle.

Heart valve disease.

Many forms of heart disease can be prevented or treated with healthy lifestyle choices.

Symptoms

Heart disease symptoms depend on the type of heart disease.

Symptoms of heart disease in the blood vessels

Coronary artery disease is a common heart condition that affects the major blood vessels that supply the heart muscle. A buildup of fats, cholesterol and other substances in and on the artery walls usually causes coronary artery disease. This buildup is called plaque. The buildup of plaque in the arteries is called atherosclerosis (ath-ur-o-skluh-ROE-sis). Atherosclerosis reduces blood flow to the heart and other parts of the body. It can lead to a heart attack, chest pain or a stroke.

Symptoms of coronary artery disease can include:

Chest pain, chest tightness, chest pressure and chest discomfort, called angina.

Shortness of breath.

Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper belly or back.

Pain, numbness, weakness or coldness in the legs or arms if the blood vessels in those body areas are narrowed.

You might not be diagnosed with coronary artery disease until you have a heart attack, angina, a stroke or heart failure. It's important to watch for heart symptoms. Talk with your healthcare team about any concerns. Heart disease can sometimes be found early with regular health checkups.

What is coronary artery disease? A Mayo Clinic cardiologist explains. Stephen Kopecky, M.D., talks about the risk factors, symptoms and treatment of coronary artery disease (CAD). Learn how lifestyle changes can lower your risk.

Show transcript for video What is coronary artery disease? A Mayo Clinic cardiologist explains. {Music playing} Stephen Kopecky, M.D., Cardiovascular Disease, Mayo Clinic: I'm Dr. Stephen Kopecky, a cardiologist at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of coronary artery disease. What is it? Who gets it? The symptoms, diagnosis and treatment. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself or someone you love, we're here to give you the best information available. Coronary artery disease, also called CAD, is a condition that affects your heart. It is the most common heart disease in the United States. CAD happens when coronary arteries struggle to supply the heart with enough blood, oxygen and nutrients. Cholesterol deposits, or plaques, are almost always to blame. These buildups narrow your arteries, decreasing blood flow to your heart. This can cause chest pain, shortness of breath or even a heart attack. CAD typically takes a long time to develop. So often, patients don't know that they have it until there's a problem. But there are ways to prevent coronary artery disease, and ways to know if you're at risk and ways to treat it. Who gets it? Anyone can develop CAD . It begins when fats, cholesterols and other substances gather along the walls of your arteries. This process is called atherosclerosis. It's typically no cause for concern. However, too much buildup can lead to a blockage, obstructing blood flow. There are a number of risk factors, common red flags, that can contribute to this and ultimately lead to coronary artery disease. First, getting older can mean more damaged and narrowed arteries. Second, men are generally at a greater risk. But the risk for women increases after menopause. Existing health conditions matter, too. High blood pressure can thicken your arteries, narrowing your blood flow. High cholesterol levels can increase the rate of plaque buildup. Diabetes is also associated with higher risk, as is being overweight. Your lifestyle plays a large role as well. Physical inactivity, long periods of unrelieved stress in your life, an unhealthy diet and smoking can all increase your risk. And finally, family history. If a close relative was diagnosed at an early age with heart disease, you're at a greater risk. All these factors together can paint a picture of your risk for developing CAD . What are the symptoms? When coronary arteries become narrow, the heart doesn't get enough oxygen-rich blood. Remember, unlike most pumps, the heart has to pump its own energy supply. It's working harder with less. And you may begin to notice these signs and symptoms of pressure or tightness in your chest. This pain is called angina. It may feel like somebody is standing on your chest. When your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs, you might develop shortness of breath or extreme fatigue during activities. And if an artery becomes totally blocked, it leads to a heart attack. Classic signs and symptoms of a heart attack include crushing, substernal chest pain, pain in your shoulders or arms, shortness of breath, and sweating. However, many heart attacks have minimal or no symptoms and are found later during routine testing. How is it diagnosed? Diagnosing CAD starts by talking to your doctor. They'll be able to look at your medical history, do a physical exam and order routine blood work. Depending on that, they may suggest one or more of the following tests: an electrocardiogram or ECG, an echocardiogram or soundwave test of the heart, stress test, cardiac catheterization and angiogram, or a cardiac CT scan. How is it treated? Treating coronary artery disease usually means making changes to your lifestyle. This might be eating healthier foods, exercising regularly, losing excess weight, reducing stress or quitting smoking. The good news is these changes can do a lot to improve your outlook. Living a healthier life translates to having healthier arteries. When necessary, treatment could involve drugs like aspirin, cholesterol-modifying medications, beta-blockers, or certain medical procedures like angioplasty or coronary artery bypass surgery. What now? Discovering you have coronary artery disease can be overwhelming. But be encouraged. There are things you can do to manage and live with this condition. Reducing cholesterol, lowering blood pressure, quitting tobacco, eating healthier, exercising and managing your stress can make a world of difference. Better heart health starts by educating yourself. So don't be afraid to seek out information and ask your doctors about coronary artery disease. If you'd like to learn even more about this condition, watch our other related videos or visit Mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.

Heart disease symptoms caused by irregular heartbeats, called arrhythmias

The heart may beat too quickly, too slowly or irregularly. Heart arrhythmia symptoms can include:

Chest pain or discomfort.

Dizziness.

Fainting or almost fainting.

Fluttering in the chest.

Lightheadedness.

Racing heartbeat.

Shortness of breath.

Slow heartbeat.

Heart disease symptoms caused by congenital heart defects

A congenital heart defect is a heart condition present at birth. Serious congenital heart defects usually are noticed soon after birth. Congenital heart defect symptoms in children could include:

Blue or gray skin. Depending on skin color, these changes may be easier or harder to see.

Swelling in the legs, belly area or areas around the eyes.

In an infant, shortness of breath during feedings, leading to poor weight gain.

Some congenital heart defects may not be found until later in childhood or during adulthood. Symptoms may include:

Getting very short of breath during exercise or activity.

Easily tiring during exercise or activity.

Swelling of the hands, ankles or feet.

Heart disease symptoms caused by diseased heart muscle, called cardiomyopathy

In the beginning, cardiomyopathy may not cause noticeable symptoms. As the condition gets worse, symptoms may include:

Dizziness, lightheadedness and fainting.

Fatigue.

Feeling short of breath during activity or at rest.

Feeling short of breath at night when trying to sleep, or waking up short of breath.

Rapid, pounding or fluttering heartbeats.

Swollen legs, ankles or feet.

Heart disease symptoms caused by heart valve disease

The heart has four valves. The valves open and close to move blood through the heart. Many things can damage the heart valves. If a heart valve is narrowed, it's called stenosis. If a heart valve lets blood flow backward, it's called regurgitation.

Symptoms of heart valve disease depend on which valve isn't working right. Symptoms may include:

Chest pain.

Fainting or almost fainting.

Fatigue.

Irregular heartbeats.

Shortness of breath.

Swollen feet or ankles.

When to see a doctor

Get emergency medical help if you have these heart disease symptoms:

Chest pain.

Shortness of breath.

Fainting.

Always call 911 or your local emergency number if you think you might be having a heart attack.

If you think you may have symptoms of heart disease, make an appointment for a health checkup.

Heart disease is easier to treat when found early.

There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. From Mayo Clinic to your inbox Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview. Email Address 1 ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Subscribe! Thank you for subscribing! You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry

Causes

Heart disease causes depend on the specific type of heart disease. There are many different types of heart disease.

How the heart works

Chambers and valves of the heart Enlarge image Close Chambers and valves of the heart Chambers and valves of the heart A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves are gates at the chamber openings. They keep blood flowing in the right direction.

To understand the causes of heart disease, it may help to understand how the heart works.

The heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers are called the atria. The two lower chambers are called the ventricles.

The right side of the heart moves blood to the lungs through blood vessels called the pulmonary arteries.

In the lungs, blood gets oxygen. The oxygen-rich blood goes to the left side of the heart through the pulmonary veins.

The left side of the heart then pumps the blood through the body's main artery, called the aorta. The blood then goes to the rest of the body.

Heart valves

Four valves in the heart keep blood flowing in the right direction. These valves are:

Aortic valve.

Mitral valve.

Pulmonary valve.

Tricuspid valve.

Each valve has flaps, called leaflets or cusps. The flaps open and close once during each heartbeat. If a valve flap doesn't open or close properly, less blood moves out of the heart to the rest of the body.

Heartbeats

The heart's electrical system keeps the heart beating. The heart's electrical signals start in a group of cells at the top of the heart called the sinus node. They pass through a pathway between the upper and lower heart chambers called the atrioventricular (AV) node. The movement of the signals causes the heart to squeeze and pump blood.

Causes of coronary artery disease

Development of atherosclerosis Enlarge image Close Development of atherosclerosis Development of atherosclerosis If there's too much cholesterol in the blood, the cholesterol and other substances may form deposits called plaque. Plaque can cause an artery to become narrowed or blocked. If a plaque ruptures, a blood clot can form. Plaque and blood clots can reduce blood flow through an artery.

A buildup of fatty substances in the arteries, called atherosclerosis, is the most common cause of coronary artery disease. Risk factors include an unhealthy diet, lack of exercise, obesity, and smoking. Healthy-lifestyle choices can help lower the risk of atherosclerosis.

Causes of irregular heartbeats, called arrhythmias

Common causes of arrhythmias or conditions that can lead to them include:

Heart muscle disease, called cardiomyopathy.

Coronary artery disease.

Diabetes.

Illegal drugs such as cocaine.

Emotional stress.

Too much alcohol or caffeine.

Heart conditions present at birth, called congenital heart defects.

High blood pressure.

Smoking.

Heart valve disease.

Some medicines, herbs and supplements.

Causes of congenital heart defects

A congenital heart defect happens while a baby is growing in the womb. Healthcare professionals aren't sure exactly what causes most congenital heart defects. But gene changes, some medical conditions, some medicines, and environmental or lifestyle factors may play a role.

Causes of heart muscle disease, called cardiomyopathy

The cause of cardiomyopathy depends on the type. There are three types:

Dilated cardiomyopathy. This is the most common type of cardiomyopathy. The cause is often unknown. It may be passed down through families, which means it's inherited.

This is the most common type of cardiomyopathy. The cause is often unknown. It may be passed down through families, which means it's inherited. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This type is usually passed down through families.

This type is usually passed down through families. Restrictive cardiomyopathy. This type of cardiomyopathy can happen for no known reason. Sometimes a buildup of protein called amyloid causes it. Other causes include connective tissue disorders.

Causes of heart valve disease

Many things can cause a damaged or diseased heart valve. Some people are born with heart valve disease. If this happens, it's called congenital heart valve disease.

Other causes of heart valve disease can include:

Rheumatic fever.

Infection in the lining of the heart valves, called infectious endocarditis.

Connective tissue disorders.

Risk factors

Risk factors for heart disease include:

Age. Growing older increases the risk of damaged and narrowed arteries and a weakened or thickened heart muscle.

Growing older increases the risk of damaged and narrowed arteries and a weakened or thickened heart muscle. Sex assigned at birth. Men are generally at greater risk of heart disease. The risk in women increases after menopause.

Men are generally at greater risk of heart disease. The risk in women increases after menopause. Family history. A family history of heart disease increases the risk of coronary artery disease, especially if a parent developed it at an early age. That means before age 55 for a male relative, such as a brother or your father, and 65 for a female relative, such as your mother or a sister.

A family history of heart disease increases the risk of coronary artery disease, especially if a parent developed it at an early age. That means before age 55 for a male relative, such as a brother or your father, and 65 for a female relative, such as your mother or a sister. Smoking. If you smoke, quit. Substances in tobacco smoke damage the arteries. Heart attacks are more common in people who smoke than in people who don't smoke. Talk with a healthcare professional if you need help quitting.

If you smoke, quit. Substances in tobacco smoke damage the arteries. Heart attacks are more common in people who smoke than in people who don't smoke. Talk with a healthcare professional if you need help quitting. Unhealthy diet. Diets high in fat, salt, sugar and cholesterol have been linked to heart disease.

Diets high in fat, salt, sugar and cholesterol have been linked to heart disease. High blood pressure. High blood pressure that's not controlled can cause the arteries to become hard and thick. These changes alter blood flow to the heart and body.

High blood pressure that's not controlled can cause the arteries to become hard and thick. These changes alter blood flow to the heart and body. High cholesterol. Having high cholesterol increases the risk of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis has been linked to heart attack and stroke.

Having high cholesterol increases the risk of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis has been linked to heart attack and stroke. Diabetes. Diabetes increases the risk of heart disease. Obesity and high blood pressure increase the risk of diabetes and heart disease.

Diabetes increases the risk of heart disease. Obesity and high blood pressure increase the risk of diabetes and heart disease. Obesity. Excess weight typically worsens other heart disease risk factors.

Excess weight typically worsens other heart disease risk factors. Lack of exercise. Being inactive is associated with many forms of heart disease and some of its risk factors too.

Being inactive is associated with many forms of heart disease and some of its risk factors too. Stress. Emotional stress may damage the arteries and make other heart disease risk factors worse.

Emotional stress may damage the arteries and make other heart disease risk factors worse. Poor dental health. Having unhealthy teeth and gums makes it easier for germs to get into the bloodstream and travel to the heart. This can cause an infection called endocarditis. Brush and floss your teeth often. Also get regular dental checkups.

Complications

Possible complications of heart disease are:

Heart failure. This is one of the most common complications of heart disease. The heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs.

This is one of the most common complications of heart disease. The heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. Heart attack. A heart attack can happen if a piece of plaque in an artery or a blood clot moves to the heart.

A heart attack can happen if a piece of plaque in an artery or a blood clot moves to the heart. Stroke. The risk factors that lead to heart disease also can lead to an ischemic stroke. This type of stroke happens when the arteries to the brain are narrowed or blocked. Too little blood reaches the brain.

The risk factors that lead to heart disease also can lead to an ischemic stroke. This type of stroke happens when the arteries to the brain are narrowed or blocked. Too little blood reaches the brain. Aneurysm. An aneurysm is a bulge in the wall of an artery. If an aneurysm bursts, you may have life-threatening internal bleeding.

An aneurysm is a bulge in the wall of an artery. If an aneurysm bursts, you may have life-threatening internal bleeding. Peripheral artery disease. In this condition, the arms or legs — usually the legs — don't get enough blood. This causes symptoms, most notably leg pain when walking, called claudication. Atherosclerosis can lead to peripheral artery disease.

In this condition, the arms or legs — usually the legs — don't get enough blood. This causes symptoms, most notably leg pain when walking, called claudication. Atherosclerosis can lead to peripheral artery disease. Sudden cardiac arrest. Sudden cardiac arrest is the sudden loss of heart activity, breathing and consciousness. It's usually due to a problem with the heart's electrical system. Sudden cardiac arrest is a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, it results in sudden cardiac death.

Prevention

The same lifestyle changes used to manage heart disease also may help prevent it. Try these heart-healthy tips: Heart disease describes a variety of issues that can affect your heart. Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common type. CAD, also known as coronary heart disease, can make your arteries narrow and lead to a heart attack. Heart disease can also affect your heart muscle, valves or electrical system. The symptoms you have and the treatments you get depend on the type of heart disease you have.

Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy

When your heart isn’t working well, it has trouble sending enough blood, oxygen and nutrients to your body. In a way, your heart delivers the fuel that keeps your body running. If your heart can’t deliver that fuel, it affects everything your body’s systems do.

Lifestyle changes and medications can keep your heart healthy and lower your chances of getting heart disease.

Heart disease is the top cause of death in the United States in people from most ethnic backgrounds.

Types of heart disease

Heart disease types include: Some risk factors for heart disease cannot be controlled, such as your age or family history. But you can take steps to lower your risk by changing the factors you can control.

Several health conditions, your lifestyle, and your age and family history can increase your risk for heart disease. These are called risk factors. Key risk factors for heart disease include:

Conditions that can increase risk

High blood pressure. High blood pressure is a major risk factor for heart disease. It is a medical condition that happens when the pressure of the blood in your arteries and other blood vessels is too high. The high pressure, if not controlled, can affect your heart and other major organs of your body, including your kidneys and brain.

High blood pressure is often called a "silent killer" because it usually has no symptoms. The only way to know whether you have high blood pressure is to measure your blood pressure. You can lower your blood pressure with lifestyle changes or with medicine to reduce your risk for heart disease and heart attack.

Unhealthy blood cholesterol levels. Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance made by the liver or found in certain foods. Your liver makes enough for your body's needs, but we often get more cholesterol from the foods we eat.

If we take in more cholesterol than the body can use, the extra cholesterol can build up in the walls of the arteries, including those of the heart. This leads to narrowing of the arteries and can decrease the blood flow to the heart, brain, kidneys, and other parts of the body.

There are two main types of blood cholesterol:

LDL (low-density lipoprotein) cholesterol, which is considered to be "bad" cholesterol because it can cause plaque buildup in your arteries.

HDL (high-density lipoprotein) cholesterol, which is considered to be "good" cholesterol because higher levels provide some protection against heart disease.

High blood cholesterol usually has no signs or symptoms. The only way to know whether you have high cholesterol is to get your cholesterol checked. Your health care team can do a simple blood test, called a "lipid profile," to measure your cholesterol levels. Learn more about getting your cholesterol checked.

Diabetes mellitus. Your body needs glucose (sugar) for energy. Insulin is a hormone made in the pancreas that helps move glucose from the food you eat to your body's cells for energy. If you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin, can't use its own insulin as well as it should, or both.

Diabetes causes sugar to build up in the blood. The risk of death from heart disease for adults with diabetes is higher than for adults who do not have diabetes.2 Talk with your doctor about ways to prevent or manage diabetes and control other risk factors.

Obesity. Obesity is excess body fat. Obesity is linked to higher "bad" cholesterol and triglyceride levels and to lower "good" cholesterol levels. Obesity can lead to high blood pressure and diabetes as well as heart disease. Talk with your health care team about a plan to reduce your weight to a healthy level. Coronary heart disease (CHD) is usually caused by a build-up of fatty deposits (atheroma) on the walls of the arteries around the heart (coronary arteries). The build-up of atheroma makes the arteries narrower, restricting the flow of blood to the heart muscle. This process is called atherosclerosis. Your risk of developing atherosclerosis is significantly increased if you: smoke

have high blood pressure (hypertension)

have high cholesterol

have high levels of lipoprotein (a)

do not exercise regularly

have diabetes Other risk factors for developing atherosclerosis include: being obese or overweight

having a family history of CHD

Smoking Smoking is a major risk factor for coronary heart disease. Both nicotine and carbon monoxide (from the smoke) put a strain on the heart by making it work faster. They also increase your risk of blood clots. Other chemicals in cigarette smoke can damage the lining of your coronary arteries, leading to furring of the arteries. Smoking significantly increases your risk of developing heart disease. Read about how to quit smoking on NHS Better Health.

High blood pressure High blood pressure (hypertension) puts a strain on your heart and can lead to CHD. Read more about high blood pressure. Find further information on understanding your blood pressure on the Blood Pressure UK website.

High cholesterol Cholesterol is a fat made by the liver from the saturated fat in your diet. It's essential for healthy cells, but too much in the blood can lead to CHD. Read more about high cholesterol.

High lipoprotein (a) Like cholesterol, lipoprotein (a), also known as LP(a), is a combination of fat and protein made by the liver. It's a known risk factor for cardiovascular disease and atherosclerosis. The level of LP(a) in your blood is inherited from your parents. It's not routinely measured, but screening is recommended for people with a moderate or high risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Find more information about high lipoprotein (a) on the HEART UK website.

Lack of regular exercise If you're inactive, fatty deposits can build up in your arteries. If the arteries that supply blood to your heart become blocked, it can lead to a heart attack. If the arteries that supply blood to your brain are affected it can cause a stroke. Read about the physical activity guidelines for adults aged 19 to 64.

Diabetes A high blood sugar level may lead to diabetes, which can more than double your risk of developing CHD. Diabetes can lead to CHD because it may cause the lining of blood vessels to become thicker, which can restrict blood flow.

Thrombosis A thrombosis is a blood clot in a vein or artery. If a thrombosis develops in a coronary artery it prevents the blood supply from reaching the heart muscle. This usually leads to a heart attack. Plaque buildup in the large arteries on the heart’s surface is the leading cause of coronary heart disease. Some people may have coronary heart disease if the blood vessels in their heart do not respond correctly when the heart needs more oxygen-rich blood.

Normal versus blocked artery. The image on the left shows the location of the coronary arteries in the heart. The top right image shows a healthy coronary artery with typical blood flow. The bottom right image shows a blocked coronary artery, narrowed by plaque buildup on the walls of the vessel. Medical Illustration Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, All Rights Reserved.

Plaque buildup

Plaque buildup in the arteries is called atherosclerosis. The buildup causes the arteries to harden and become narrower over time. This can lower or block blood flow to the heart muscle.

Small amounts of plaque can also build up inside the small blood vessels in the heart, causing coronary microvascular disease.

Problems with how the blood vessels work

Sometimes, the heart’s blood vessels do not respond to signals that the heart needs more oxygen-rich blood. Coronary arteries typically widen to allow more blood flow to the heart when a person is physically active or under stress. In coronary heart disease, the size of these arteries may not change, or they may even narrow.

The cause of these problems is unclear, but it may involve damage or injury to the walls of the arteries or tiny blood vessels from long-term inflammation , high blood pressure, or diabetes.

Damage to the inner walls of the larger coronary arteries can cause them to spasm (suddenly tighten), which is called a vasospasm. The spasm causes the arteries to narrow temporarily, which blocks blood flow to the heart. What can you do to lower your risk of cardiovascular disease?

According to the World Health Organization, as many as 80% of all heart attacks and strokes are preventable. The majority of deaths due to CVD are precipitated by risk factors such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol, obesity, or diabetes, which can, to a large extent, be prevented or controlled through the consumption of a healthy diet, regular exercise and avoiding tobacco. Keeping an eye on your blood pressure, cholesterol levels and blood sugar levels is also very important.

Eat a healthy and balanced diet

Eating a healthy, balanced diet is crucial to maintaining a healthy heart and circulation system. A healthy diet should include a wide variety of unprocessed and fresh foods, including plenty of fruit and vegetables (at least five portions every day), whole grains, nuts and foods low in saturated fats, sugars and salt. Be wary of processed foods, which often contain high levels of salt, and drink lots of water!

Exercise regularly

It only takes 30 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity, five days a week, to improve and maintain your health. Adults (aged 18-65) and seniors (65+) should aim to do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity, or at least 75 minutes of high-intensity physical activity, every week. Children and adolescents should do at least 60 minutes of moderate- to vigorous-intensity physical activity every day.

Try to make exercise a regular part of your life: use the stairs instead of the lift, get off the bus a few stops earlier and walk the rest of the way. Being active is also a great way to relieve stress and control your weight, which are both risk factors for cardiovascular disease.

Maintain a healthy body weight

Lowering your risk of overweight and obesity normally involves reducing the number of calories consumed from fats and sugars, increasing the portion of daily intake of fruit, vegetables, whole grains and nuts, and exercising regularly. At least 60 minutes of exercise most days a week will help you maintain a healthy body weight.

Avoid tobacco use

If you stop smoking, your risk of coronary heart disease will be halved within a year and will return to a normal level over time. Avoid smoke-filled environments: exposure to second-hand smoke significantly increases the risk of heart attack. All forms of tobacco are harmful, and there is no safe level of exposure to tobacco. If you’re having trouble quitting tobacco, talk to your doctor about developing a tailored plan to suit your needs.

Avoid alcohol

As with tobacco, there is no safe level for drinking alcohol, and the detrimental effects of alcohol far outweigh any potential protective benefits. While drinking less may reduce your risk of CVD, evidence shows that the ideal situation for health is to not drink at all. Even moderate drinkers notice health benefits when they stop drinking alcohol.

Manage stress

Stress can cause the arteries to tighten, which can increase the risk of heart disease, especially in women. Exercising, deep breathing, relaxing your muscles and making time for the things you love are some things you can do to help manage your stress levels. If things are starting to feel out of hand, don’t be afraid to talk to someone or seek professional help.

Know your numbers

Knowing your numbers is an important part of keeping your heart healthy. Checking your blood pressure, cholesterol levels and blood sugar levels on a regular basis is important to help determine and control your risk of developing cardiovascular disease.

Know your blood pressure: High blood pressure, or hypertension, is one of the biggest causes of heart attack and stroke. It usually has no symptoms, so it’s important to get it regularly checked and, if needed, take the necessary measures to lower it, which may include dietary changes, increased physical activity, and medication.

High blood pressure, or hypertension, is one of the biggest causes of heart attack and stroke. It usually has no symptoms, so it’s important to get it regularly checked and, if needed, take the necessary measures to lower it, which may include dietary changes, increased physical activity, and medication. Know your cholesterol: High levels of cholesterol in your blood also increase your risk of cardiovascular disease, including heart attacks and strokes. Blood cholesterol can normally be controlled through a healthy diet and, if necessary, by appropriate medications.

High levels of cholesterol in your blood also increase your risk of cardiovascular disease, including heart attacks and strokes. Blood cholesterol can normally be controlled through a healthy diet and, if necessary, by appropriate medications. Know your blood sugar: Having diabetes, or high blood sugar, increases increase your risk of heart attacks and strokes, so it’s important to know your numbers and take any necessary precautions to control your blood sugar if your doctor prescribes it.

Take your medication as prescribed

If you have a higher risk of developing heart disease or stroke, you may need to take medication to reduce your risk. These can include statins to lower blood cholesterol levels, low-dose aspirin to prevent blood clots, insulin for diabetes and tablets to reduce blood pressure. Take the medication that your doctor has prescribed and make sure you stick to your regiment.

Know the warning signs

The sooner assistance is sought, the greater the chances of a full recovery. What is cardiovascular disease?

Cardiovascular disease is a group of diseases affecting your heart and blood vessels. These diseases can affect one or many parts of your heart and/or blood vessels. A person may be symptomatic (physically experiencing the disease) or asymptomatic (not feeling anything at all).

Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy

Cardiovascular disease includes heart or blood vessel issues, including:

Narrowing of the blood vessels in your heart, other organs or throughout your body.

Heart and blood vessel problems present at birth.

Heart valves that aren’t working right.

Irregular heart rhythms.

How common is cardiovascular disease?

Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death worldwide and in the U.S.

Almost half of adults in the U.S. have some form of cardiovascular disease. It affects people of all ages, sexes, ethnicities and socioeconomic levels. One in three women dies from cardiovascular disease. The term "heart disease" refers to several types of heart conditions. The most common type of heart disease in the United States is coronary artery disease (CAD). CAD affects the blood flow to the heart. Decreased blood flow can cause a heart attack.

Sometimes heart disease may be "silent" and not diagnosed until a person experiences signs or symptoms of a heart attack, heart failure, or an arrhythmia. When these events happen, symptoms may include: 1

Risk factors

High blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, and smoking are key risk factors for heart disease. About half of people in the United States (47%) have at least one of these three risk factors.2 Several other medical conditions and lifestyle choices can also put people at a higher risk for heart disease, including

Learn how heart disease and mental health disorders are related. Key facts Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death globally.

An estimated 19.8 million people died from CVDs in 2022, representing approximately 32% of all global deaths. Of these deaths, 85% were due to heart attack and stroke.

Over three quarters of CVD deaths take place in low- and middle-income countries.

Out of the 18 million premature deaths (under the age of 70) due to noncommunicable diseases in 2021, at least 38% were caused by CVDs.

Most cardiovascular diseases can be prevented by addressing behavioural and environmental risk factors such as tobacco use, unhealthy diet (including excess salt, sugar, and fats) and obesity, physical inactivity, harmful use of alcohol and air pollution.

It is important to detect cardiovascular disease as early as possible so that management with counselling and medicines can begin. Overview



Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are a group of disorders of the heart and blood vessels. They include:

coronary heart disease – a disease of the blood vessels supplying the heart muscle;

cerebrovascular disease – a disease of the blood vessels supplying the brain;

peripheral arterial disease – a disease of blood vessels supplying the arms and legs;

rheumatic heart disease – damage to the heart muscle and heart valves from rheumatic fever, caused by streptococcal bacteria;

congenital heart disease – birth defects that affect the normal development and functioning of the heart caused by malformations of the heart structure from birth; and

deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism – blood clots in the leg veins, which can dislodge and move to the heart and lungs.

Heart attacks and strokes are usually acute events and are mainly caused by a blockage that prevents blood from flowing to the heart or brain. The most common reason for this is a build-up of fatty deposits on the inner walls of the blood vessels that supply the heart or brain. Strokes can be caused by bleeding from a blood vessel in the brain or from blood clots.

Risk factors for cardiovascular disease

The most important behavioural risk factors of heart disease and stroke are unhealthy diet, physical inactivity, tobacco use and harmful use of alcohol. Amongst environmental risk factors, air pollution is an important factor. The effects of behavioural risk factors may show up in individuals as raised blood pressure, raised blood glucose, raised blood lipids, and overweight and obesity. These “intermediate risks factors” can be measured in primary care facilities and indicate an increased risk of heart attack, stroke, heart failure and other complications.

Cessation of tobacco use, reduction of salt in the diet, eating more fruit and vegetables, regular physical activity and avoiding harmful use of alcohol have been shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. Health policies that create conducive environments for making healthy choices affordable and available, as well as improving air quality and reducing pollution, are essential for motivating people to adopt and sustain healthy behaviours.

There are also a number of underlying determinants of CVDs. These are a reflection of the major forces driving social, economic and cultural change – globalization, urbanization and population ageing. Other determinants of CVDs include poverty, stress and hereditary factors.

In addition, drug treatment of hypertension, diabetes and high blood lipids are necessary to reduce cardiovascular risk and prevent heart attacks and strokes among people with these conditions.

Common symptoms of cardiovascular diseases

Symptoms of heart attacks and strokes

Often, there are no symptoms of the underlying disease of the blood vessels. A heart attack or stroke may be the first sign of underlying disease. Symptoms of a heart attack include:

pain or discomfort in the centre of the chest; and/or

pain or discomfort in the arms, the left shoulder, elbows, jaw, or back.

In addition the person may experience difficulty in breathing or shortness of breath; nausea or vomiting; light-headedness or faintness; a cold sweat; and turning pale. Women are more likely than men to have shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and back or jaw pain.

The most common symptom of a stroke is sudden weakness of the face, arm, or leg, most often on one side of the body. Other symptoms include sudden onset of:

numbness of the face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body;

confusion, difficulty speaking or understanding speech;

difficulty seeing with one or both eyes;

difficulty walking, dizziness and/or loss of balance or coordination;

severe headache with no known cause; and/or

fainting or unconsciousness.

People experiencing these symptoms should seek medical care immediately.

Characteristics of rheumatic heart disease

Rheumatic heart disease is caused by damage to the heart valves and heart muscle from the inflammation and scarring caused by rheumatic fever. Rheumatic fever is caused by an abnormal response of the body to infection with streptococcal bacteria, which usually begins as a sore throat or tonsillitis in children.

Rheumatic fever mostly affects children in developing countries, especially where poverty is widespread. Globally, about 2% of deaths from cardiovascular diseases are related to rheumatic heart disease.

Symptoms of rheumatic heart disease

Symptoms of rheumatic heart disease include: shortness of breath, fatigue, irregular heartbeats, chest pain and fainting.

Symptoms of rheumatic fever include: fever, pain and swelling of the joints, nausea, stomach cramps and vomiting.

Why cardiovascular diseases are a development issue in low- and middle-income countries

Approximately 80% of the world's deaths from CVDs occur in low- and middle-income countries. People living in low- and middle-income countries often do not have the benefit of primary health care programmes for early detection and treatment of people with risk factors for CVDs. People in low- and middle-income countries who suffer from CVDs and other noncommunicable diseases have less access to effective and equitable health care services which respond to their needs. As a result, for many people in these countries detection is often late in the course of the disease and people die at a younger age from CVDs and other noncommunicable diseases, often in their most productive years.

The poorest people in low- and middle-income countries are most affected. At the household level, evidence is emerging that CVDs and other noncommunicable diseases contribute to poverty due to catastrophic health spending and high out-of-pocket expenditure. At the macro-economic level, CVDs place a heavy burden on the economies of low- and middle-income countries.

How the burden of cardiovascular diseases can be reduced

The key to cardiovascular disease reduction lies in the inclusion of cardiovascular disease management interventions in universal health coverage packages, although in a high number of countries health systems require significant investment and reorientation to effectively manage CVDs.

Evidence from 18 countries has shown that hypertension programmes can be implemented efficiently and cost-effectively at the primary care level which will ultimately result in reduced coronary heart disease and stroke. Patients with cardiovascular disease should have access to appropriate technology and medication. Basic medicines that should be available include:

aspirin

beta-blockers

calcium channel blockers

angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors

diuretics

statins.

An acute event such as a heart attack or stroke should be promptly managed.

Sometimes, surgical operations are required to treat CVDs. They include:

coronary artery bypass;

balloon angioplasty (where a small balloon-like device is threaded through an artery to open the blockage);

valve repair and replacement;

heart transplantation; and

artificial heart operations.

Medical devices are required to treat some CVDs. Such devices include pacemakers, prosthetic valves, and patches for closing holes in the heart.

WHO response

WHO works to drive and support the implementation of effective actions for the prevention, management, and control of CVDs and their associated risk factors, especially in low- and middle-income countries. To this end, WHO:

develops evidence-based guidelines and tools for the prevention and management of major noncommunicable diseases, including CVDs;

develops norms and standards for cardiovascular risk assessment, hypertension diagnosis, and CVD care;

raises awareness about the growing global burden of CVDs; and

conducts global surveillance on CVDs and their key risk factors.

In 2016, to further scale up action, WHO launched the Global HEARTS Initiative, aiming to support countries in strengthening CVD prevention and control through primary health care, particularly in low- and middle-income countries.

In 2013, WHO Member States agreed on global mechanisms to reduce the avoidable NCD burden including a "Global action plan for the prevention and control of NCDs 2013-2020". This Plan has the aim of reducing the number of premature deaths from NCDs by 25% by 2025 through nine voluntary global targets. Two of the targets directly focus on preventing and controlling CVDs.

Target 6: Reduce global prevalence of raised blood pressure by 25% between 2010 and 2025.

Target 8: At least 50% of eligible people should receive drug therapy and counselling (including glycaemic control) to prevent heart attacks and strokes by 2025.

In addition, target 9 states that there should be 80% availability of the affordable basic technologies and essential medicines, including generics, required to treat major NCDs in both public and private facilities.

Achieving these targets will require significant investment in and strengthening of health systems.

WHO is also working on increasing the normative guidance available for the management of acute coronary syndrome and stroke. Summary

What is heart disease?

Heart disease is a general term that includes many types of heart problems. It's a type of cardiovascular disease, which means heart and blood vessel disease.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, but there are ways to prevent and manage many types of heart disease.

What are the types of heart disease?

There are many different types of heart disease. Some you may be born with, called congenital heart disease. Other types develop during your lifetime.

Coronary artery disease (also called coronary heart disease) is the most common type of heart disease. It happens slowly over time when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. The plaque narrows or blocks blood flow to the heart muscle and can lead to other heart problems:

Angina - chest pain from lack of blood flow

Heart attacks - when part of the heart muscle dies from loss of blood flow

Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs

Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat

Other types of heart diseases may affect your heart valves or heart muscle (cardiomyopathy).

What causes heart diseases?

The causes of heart disease depend on the type of disease. Some possible causes include lifestyle, genetics, infections, medicines, and other diseases.

Who is more likely to develop heart diseases?

There are many different factors that can make you more likely to develop heart disease. Some of these factors you can change, but others you cannot.

What are the symptoms of heart disease?

Your symptoms will depend on the type of heart disease you have. You may not have symptoms at first. In some cases, you may not know you have heart disease until you have a complication such as a heart attack.

How are heart diseases diagnosed?

To find out if you have heart disease, your health care provider will:

Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms

, including your symptoms Ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had heart disease

, including relatives who have had heart disease Do a physical exam

Likely run heart tests and blood tests

In some cases, your provider may refer you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for tests, diagnosis, and care.

What are the treatments for heart disease?

Treatment plans for heart disease depend on the type of heart disease you have, how serious your symptoms are, and what other health conditions you have. Possible treatments may include:

Heart-healthy lifestyle changes

Medicines

Procedures or surgeries

Cardiac rehabilitation

Can heart diseases be prevented?

You may be able to lower your risk of certain heart diseases by making heart-healthy lifestyle changes and managing any other medical conditions you have.

NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute